docs(nx-dev): article about TypeScript monorepo package linking strategies (#29694)
nrwl/nx: docs/blog/2025-01-20-linking-ts-in-monorepos.md

{% toc /%}

## What Does "Linking Packages" Actually Mean?

When you work in a monorepo, the goal is to split logic into separate packages. Why? To create smaller, self-contained, and maintainable units. This approach not only enhances reusability but also helps scale—whether that's scaling teams or optimizing CI pipelines.

As you split logic into packages, you'll inevitably need to link them together. At the **code level**, this is typically expressed through an import statement on the consumer side—whether that's an app using a package or one package depending on another.

```ts
import { something } from '@tsmono/mypackage';
```

To make this work, there are two key phases:

- **Building:** This includes **type checking** and optionally **compilation/transpilation**.
- **Execution:** This is when the app runs.

> TypeScript handles type checking and optionally compilation, while tools like esbuild, Rspack, or Vite ensure paths are resolved when running the app. In this article, we'll mostly focus on the "building" phase.

Reviewer: It might be me, but I think it's a bit unclear what we're referring to with "compilation/transpilation" being optional. At first, I thought we were referring to that not being needed in platforms like Deno or runtimes like Bun, but I think the intention here is to say that we don't need to use `tsc` to "compile/transpile" because it can be done by other build tools, is that the intention?

If that's the case, maybe we should be clearer about that. Note we don't explicitly mention compile/transpile with `tsc`, and what we say is that compiling/transpiling is optional.

Author: yeah the thought was not doing the compilation/transpilation with `tsc` specifically but with tools like Vite etc (which handle it internally) at least from the user's perspective. But I see the confusion. Going to fix it

    "outDir": "../../dist/packages/lib-a",
    "rootDir": "src"
  },
  "include": ["src/**/*"]
}
```

{% /tab %}
{% /tabs %}

Changing the configuration alone isn't enough. If you continue using `tsc` (or `tsc -p`), TypeScript will ignore your project references and treat the workspace as a single large project. To fully leverage project references, you must switch to using the `--build` (`-b`) flag with `tsc`. This mode enables TypeScript to process each project individually, respecting dependencies defined in the references property.

```json {% fileName="package.json" %}
{
  "name": "ts-monorepo-linking",
  ...
  "scripts": {
    "dev": "tsx --tsconfig tsconfig.base.json apps/myapp/src/index.ts",
    "build": "tsc --build",
    "clean": "tsc --build --clean",
    "typecheck": "tsc --build --emitDeclarationOnly"
  }
}
```

> Note: `--noEmit` is not compatible with the `--build` flag. Use `--emitDeclarationOnly`.

### Observations

**Depencency resolution:**
Imports remain the same, relying on TypeScript path aliases to resolve dependencies. Project references don't change how TypeScript resolves paths; they focus on modularizing type checking and compilation.

> > As a side note: While this article focuses on the build and type-checking phase, it's worth noting that running the transpiled TypeScript code directly wouldn't work out of the box. This is because TypeScript path aliases are purely a compile-time construct—they don't exist in the output JavaScript. To run the application, you'd need a runtime plugin or bundler (like Webpack, esbuild, or Vite) that can resolve these aliases to actual file paths.

Author: right, pasted it into the wrong section. Good catch

**Modularity:**  
Project references create stronger boundaries by treating each package as an independent TypeScript program. This enforces better isolation and ensures dependencies are type-checked at the package level.

**Peformance:**  
This approach introduces incremental builds, where only modified packages are recompiled. TypeScript generates `.tsbuildinfo` files to track changes, reducing memory usage and speeding up type checking and compilation. This is particularly beneficial for large workspaces or CI pipelines.

From a TypeScript program structure we now don't have a single TypeScript program, but multiple ones.

```
ts-monorepo-linking
   ├─ apps
   │  └─ myapp
   │     ├─ src
   │     └─ tsconfig.json  <<< app TS program
   ├─ packages
   │  └─ lib-a
   │     ├─ src
   │     └─ tsconfig.json  <<< lib-a TS program
   ├─ tsconfig.base.json

>    └─ tsconfig.json        <<< root-level orchestrator

Author: yeah makes sense.

}
```

This configuration works well for local monorepo use cases but delegates the responsibility of bundling to the consumer. To avoid that, you can pre-compile the package. You'll need to:

- Adjust our `lib-a`'s `package.json` to point to the compiled artifacts in `dist`.
- Setting up a pre-compilation step.
- Ensure all projects are compiled in the correct order based on their dependencies.

In our simple setup, the TypeScript project references already establish a dependency graph. Running `tsc --build` from the root of the workspace ensures that projects are compiled in the correct order based on their dependencies.

> In a more complex setup you might need to rely on additional tooling such as Nx that has [a task pipelines functionality](/concepts/task-pipeline-configuration) built-in.

The resulting structure of the `dist` folder looks like this: (notice the `*.js` and `*.d.ts` files)

```
ts-monorepo-linking
   ├─ apps
   │  └─ myapp
   │     ├─ ...
   │     ├─ package.json
   │     └─ tsconfig.json
   ├─ package.json
   ├─ packages
   │  └─ lib-a
   │     ├─ dist
   │     │  ├─ index.d.ts
   │     │  ├─ index.d.ts.map
   │     │  ├─ index.js
   │     │  ├─ index.js.map

>    │     │  └─ tsconfig.tsbuildinfo

Author: yeah good catch. fixed it

- **Automated Setup with Generators:** Nx provides generators for scaffolding applications and library packages. These generators handle the `tsconfig.json` setup automatically, ensuring that TypeScript project references are correctly configured from the start.
- **Automatic Synchronization:** Nx includes a [sync command](/concepts/sync-generators) that is automatically triggered before critical operations like building or serving a project. This command verifies whether the TypeScript project references are in sync across the workspace. If discrepancies are found, Nx automatically updates the references arrays, keeping your configuration consistent and accurate without manual intervention.

## Wrapping Up

We've explored various strategies for configuring TypeScript-based packages in a monorepo, starting with relative imports, moving to TS path aliases, and finally leveraging the "workspaces protocol" in combination with TypeScript project references.

If you want to try these approaches, check out the companion GitHub repository at [https://github.com/juristr/ts-monorepo-linking](https://github.com/juristr/ts-monorepo-linking), or create a new workspace with Nx:

```shell

> npx create-nx-workspace mymonorepo --preset=ts --workspaces

Reviewer: The `ts` preset doesn't need the `--workspaces` flag. The rest of the presets are behind the flag.

---
title: 'Managing TypeScript Packages in Monorepos'
slug: managing-ts-packages-in-monorepos
authors: [Juri Strumpflohner]
tags: []
---

> Managing TypeScript packages in a monorepo comes with unique challenges. As your monorepo grow, so does the complexity of structuring and resolving dependencies between packages. From using simple relative imports to leveraging TypeScript path aliases, project references, and leveraging the package manager's workspaces feature: developers have a variety of strategies at their disposal. But which one is the right fit for your needs?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Managing TypeScript packages in a monorepo presents unique challenges. As your monorepo grows, so does the complexity of structuring and resolving dependencies between packages. From using simple relative imports to taking advantage of TypeScript path aliases, project references, and your package manager’s workspaces feature, developers have a variety of strategies at their disposal. But which approach is the best fit for you?
```

Reviewer 2: Removing the `:` and grow -> grows were the required grammar corrections, the rest was subjective

{% toc /%}

## What Does it Mean to Manage and Share TypeScript Code in a Monorepo?

When you work in a monorepo, the goal is to split logic into separate packages. Why? To create smaller, self-contained, and maintainable units. This approach not only enhances reusability but also helps scale: whether that's scaling teams or optimizing CI pipelines.

As you split logic into packages, you'll inevitably need to somehow connect them together. At the **code level**, this is typically expressed through an import statement on the consumer side—whether that's an application using a package or one package depending on another.

```ts
import { something } from '@tsmono/mypackage';
```

To have this work we need to be able to resolve the `@tsmono/mypackage` import to the actual file path. This needs to happen during:

- **Build:** This includes type checking and compilation/transpilation.

> - **Execution:** This is when the application runs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Runtime:** This is when the application runs in the browser/on the server.
```

Reviewer 2: Runtime feels more idiomatic and is also the term used later in the article

**Performance :**  
Path aliases don't improve performance compared to relative imports. The entire workspace is still treated as a single TypeScript project, so type checking and compilation remain unchanged. This approach focuses on maintainability and readability rather than optimizing performance.

## Improving Performance with Project References

Example: [Stackblitz](https://stackblitz.com/github/juristr/ts-monorepo-linking/tree/ts-proj-references-simple) - [Github](https://github.com/juristr/ts-monorepo-linking/tree/ts-proj-references-simple)

TypeScript project references let you break a large TypeScript project into smaller, manageable units. This approach aligns with monorepo structures, allowing each package to act as its own TypeScript program while maintaining relationships between them.

To use project references:

- Add the `references` property in `tsconfig.json` files to point to dependent projects.
- Enable `composite: true` in `compilerOptions` (this also enables `incremental` and `declaration` by default).
- Use `tsc --build` (`tsc -b`) for compilation and type checking.

> > For a more deep-dive on TypeScript project references, make sure to check out our article << **TODO LINK HERE ZACK's POST**

Reviewer 2: Is this being addressed pre-merge?

Our workspace structure still remains the same with the exception of adding another root-level `tsconfig.json`:

```
ts-monorepo-linking
   ├─ apps
   │  └─ myapp
   │     ├─ src
   │     │  └─ index.ts
   │     └─ tsconfig.json
   ├─ packages
   │  └─ lib-a
   │     ├─ src
   │     │  └─ index.ts
   │     └─ tsconfig.json
   ├─ tsconfig.base.json
   └─ tsconfig.json
```

> This new `tsconfig.json` is the entry point for TypeScript project references, pointing to all individual TypeScript configs of the projects that are part of the monorepo workspace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This new `tsconfig.json` is the entry point for TypeScript project references, pointing to all individual TypeScript configs of the projects that are part of the monorepo workspace. It includes an explicitly empty `files` array, because it intentionally does not contain any files of its own. This is known as a **solution style config**.
```

We reference solution style config later but never define it. This feels like the logical place to do so.

Author: cool. yeah I had it in there but then dropped it again. Didn't want to introduce other terms, but it makes sense I think. thank you

}
```

{% /tab %}

{% tab label="lib-a TSConfig" %}

```json {% fileName="packages/lib-a/tsconfig.json" %}
{
  "extends": "../../tsconfig.base.json",
  "compilerOptions": {
    "outDir": "../../dist/packages/lib-a",
    "rootDir": "src",
    "tsBuildInfoFile": "../../dist/packages/lib-a/tsconfig.tsbuildinfo"
  },
  "include": ["src/**/*"]
}
```

{% /tab %}
{% /tabs %}

Changing the configuration alone isn't enough. If you continue using `tsc` (or `tsc -p`), TypeScript will ignore your project references and treat the workspace as a single large project. To fully leverage project references, you must switch to using the `--build` (`-b`) flag with `tsc`. This mode enables TypeScript to process each project individually, respecting dependencies defined in the references property.

```json {% fileName="package.json" %}
{
  "name": "ts-monorepo-linking",
  ...
  "scripts": {
    "dev": "tsx --tsconfig tsconfig.base.json apps/myapp/src/index.ts",
    "build": "tsc --build",
    "clean": "tsc --build --clean",
    "typecheck": "tsc --build --emitDeclarationOnly"
  }
}
```

> Note: `--noEmit` is not compatible with the `--build` flag. Use `--emitDeclarationOnly`.

### Observations

> **Dependency resolution:**

Reviewer 2: Something weird is happening with this that is not visible in the diff view, there is no newline after dependency resolution in the rendered page

Author: oh I see. I'll fix those, thanks

Imports remain the same, relying on TypeScript path aliases to resolve dependencies. Project references don't change how TypeScript resolves paths; they focus on modularizing type checking and compilation.

**Modularity:**  
Project references create stronger boundaries by treating each package as an independent TypeScript program. This enforces better isolation and ensures dependencies are type-checked at the package level.

> **Performance :**  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Performance:**  
```

{% tabs %}

{% tab label="NPM/Yarn/Bun Workspaces" %}

For most package managers, you can use the `workspaces` property in the root `package.json` to define the packages that are part of the monorepo.

```json {% fileName="package.json" %}
{
  "name": "ts-monorepo-linking",
  ...
  "workspaces": [
    "apps/*",
    "packages/*"
  ]
}

```

{% /tab %}

{% tab label="PNPM Workspaces" %}

PNPM uses a `pnpm-workspace.yaml` file to define the packages that are part of the monorepo.

```yaml {% fileName="pnpm-workspace.yaml" %}
packages:
  - 'apps/*'
  - 'packages/*'
```

{% /tab %}
{% /tabs %}

This approach **eliminates the need for TypeScript path aliases for module resolution**.

```diff {% fileName="tsconfig.base.json" %}
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "target": "ES2020",
    "module": "NodeNext",
    "strict": true,
    "moduleResolution": "NodeNext",
    "composite": true,
    "declaration": true,
    "declarationMap": true,
    "sourceMap": true,
-   "baseUrl": ".",
-   "paths": {
-     "@ts-monorepo-linking/lib-a": ["packages/lib-a/src/index.ts"]
-   }
  }
}
```

> Instead, the package manager's workspaces feature makes sure to link the packages properly s.t. they can be resolved correctly at build and runtime. This doesn't have any impact on our TypeScript project references setup which cares about type checking and resolves dependencies via the `references` property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead, the package manager's workspaces feature makes sure to link the packages properly such that they can be resolved correctly at build and runtime. This doesn't have any impact on our TypeScript project references setup which cares about type checking and resolves dependencies via the `references` property.
```

This is not a standard/ubiquitous abbreviation in English (not like e.g. or i.e.) so should be written out to avoid confusion

> > Note, setting up package resolving with workspaces is the generally recommended approach. More on that later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Note, setting up package resolution with workspaces is the generally recommended approach. More on that later.
```

**Performance :**  
This setup can slightly improve type-checking performance, especially within code editors. Since the type information is already generated as `.d.ts` files during precompilation, the editor can directly rely on these instead of processing TypeScript source files through project references. While cached project references can achieve similar speeds, precompiled declaration files might potentially reduce some overhead.

## Which One Should I Choose?

Here are some thoughts on which approach to use.

**TypeScript Path Aliases: A Simple Option**

TypeScript path aliases have been a reliable way to manage package resolution, particularly before package managers introduced the workspaces feature. They're straightforward to set up, requiring only a global `tsconfig.json` without additional. However, there are limitations to consider as they require additional bundling support/alias resolvers at runtime and might come with some performance degradation in large workspaces.

{% callout type="deepdive" title="Isn't Nx using TS Path Aliases?" %}

> Yes and no. Nx has been around before package managers introduced workspaces. As a result, the default setup in Nx traditionally leveraged a root-level `tsconfig.base.json` containing path aliases to link packages within the monorepo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Yes and no. Nx has been around since before package managers introduced workspaces. As a result, the default setup in Nx traditionally leveraged a root-level `tsconfig.base.json` containing path aliases to link packages within the monorepo.
```

> That said, Nx can also be used in combination with the NPM/Yarn/PNPM/Bun workspaces, as [shown here](/recipes/adopting-nx/adding-to-monorepo). This led to two distinct setups for monorepos with Nx: one using TypeScript path aliases and the other leveraging workspaces. To address the confusion this created, the Nx team has spent the last year enhancing Nx to unify these approaches. The goal is to align with "the platform" by adopting and promoting the workspaces, while updating Nx plugins to fully support it, preserving the developer experience (DX) benefits Nx users have come to love.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That said, Nx can also be used in combination with NPM/Yarn/PNPM/Bun workspaces, as [shown here](/recipes/adopting-nx/adding-to-monorepo). This led to two distinct setups for monorepos with Nx: one using TypeScript path aliases and the other leveraging workspaces. To address the confusion this created, the Nx team has spent the last year enhancing Nx to unify these approaches. The goal is to align with "the platform" by adopting and promoting package manager workspaces, while updating Nx plugins to fully support it, preserving the developer experience (DX) benefits Nx users have come to love.
```

If you're currently using the TypeScript path aliases approach, there's no need to worry. The Nx team is working on comprehensive documentation and semi-automated tools to help with migration. Additionally, it's possible to migrate manually and even incrementally, allowing you to adopt the workspaces at your own pace.
{% /callout %}

**Workspaces: The Recommended Approach**

With widespread support in modern package managers (NPM, PNPM, Yarn, Bun), the workspaces feature has become the preferred method for managing package resolution. It aligns closely with the Node.js platform, leveraging native package resolution mechanisms that also work at runtime. This eliminates the portability issues inherent to TypeScript path aliases.

> When combined with **TypeScript project references**, this method becomes even more powerful. Workspaces handles package linking s.t. Node can resolve them properly, while TypeScript project references optimize type-checking and enable incremental builds (for TypeScript). Together, they improve performance, reduce memory usage, and simplify dependency management in larger workspaces. This combination is the recommended way to structure and manage TypeScript packages in a monorepo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When combined with **TypeScript project references**, this method becomes even more powerful. Workspaces handles package linking such that Node can resolve them properly, while TypeScript project references optimize type-checking and enable incremental builds (for TypeScript). Together, they improve performance, reduce memory usage, and simplify dependency management in larger workspaces. This combination is the recommended way to structure and manage TypeScript packages in a monorepo.
```

Reviewer 2: This is not a standard/ubiquitous abbreviation in English (not like e.g. or i.e.) so should be written out to avoid confusion

- **Automatic Synchronization:** Nx includes a [sync command](/concepts/sync-generators) that is automatically triggered before critical operations like building or serving a project. This command verifies whether the TypeScript project references are in sync across the workspace. If discrepancies are found, Nx automatically updates the references arrays, keeping your configuration consistent and accurate without manual intervention.

## Wrapping Up

We've explored various strategies for configuring TypeScript-based packages in a monorepo, starting with relative imports, moving to TS path aliases, and finally leveraging the workspaces in combination with TypeScript project references.

If you want to try these approaches, check out the companion GitHub repository at [https://github.com/juristr/ts-monorepo-linking](https://github.com/juristr/ts-monorepo-linking), or create a new workspace with Nx:

```shell
npx create-nx-workspace mymonorepo --workspaces
```

> > Note the `--workspaces` is a temporary flag to instruct Nx to generate a workspaces based monorepo setup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Note `--workspaces` is a temporary flag to instruct Nx to generate a workspaces based monorepo setup.
```

> **TODO LINK TO DOCS**

Reviewer 2: Addressed pre-merge?
